---
layout: post
title: About the Project
description: 
image: assets/images/newberrydark.jpg
nav-menu: true
---

The *Atlas of Historical County Boundaries* provides maps and text about the creation and subsequent changes in the size, shape, and location of every county in the fifty United States and the District of Columbia until 2012. It also includes non-county areas, unsuccessful authorizations for new counties, changes in county names and organization, and the temporary attachments of non-county areas and unorganized counties to fully functioning counties. The principal sources are the most authoritative available: the session laws of the colonies, territories, and states that created and changed the counties.

The *Atlas of Historical County Boundaries* successfully completed the project of documenting boundary changes in all 50 states in June 2010. The national data files were contributed in 2012. The atlas is not being updated with any new boundary changes. For more recent boundary data, please consult the [NHGIS](https://www.nhgis.org). The project was supported throughout its work by several current and past research centers at The Newberry Library in Chicago. The current web platform was designed by Parker Otto.

## Access and Metadata
The Newberry makes the contents of this site available for reuse without permission under the Creative Commons CC0 1.0 Universal Public Domain Dedication: https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/. Accompanying the data for each state and its counties are two versions of the essential metadata: one an extensive, detailed document following the Federal Geographic Data Committee (FGDC) model, the other a one-page summary. 

## History of the Atlas
The Atlas was conceived in 1975 after historians working on the *Atlas of Early American History* (1976) at the Newberry Library in Chicago discovered the nearly complete lack of reliable maps of American counties in the revolutionary and early national periods. The U.S. Historical County Boundary Data File Project was launched in 1976 at the Newberry to create a cartographic database of county boundaries for the period from 1788 to 1980. Principal funding was provided by a grant from the National Endowment for the Humanities with additional support from private individuals and foundations. The Newberry served as sponsor and headquarters. The choice of a digital product was based upon a desire to adopt the most economical mapmaking practices—gains in efficiency over manual practices was a theme emphasized by proponents of the then new cartographic technology—and to demonstrate the applicability of that technology to historical cartography. The cartographic laboratory at the University of Wisconsin, Madison, performed the digital cartography. As the first project of its type, the Newberry undertaking necessarily had a strong experimental quality; it was, in effect, an early version of the current Atlas.

Once news of the project spread, many potential users asked that the data also be published in the traditional form of books because few of them had access to the facilities needed to utilize a cartographic database. By late 1982, when the project concluded, staff had compiled data on the evolution of county boundaries in fourteen states during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. The results were disseminated in five volumes published by G. K. Hall, the *Historical Atlas and Chronology of County Boundaries, 1788–1980* (1984), and in a cartographic database, *County Boundaries of Selected United States Territories/States, 1790–1980* (ICPSR 9025), deposited with the Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR) in Ann Arbor.

The success of this first project led to this Atlas, which was launched in 1987. The goal was to provide reliable and accessible data on historical county changes for the entire nation from the colonial period onwards. All work, from historical compilation through computerized mapmaking, was concentrated at the Newberry, with principal funding from the National Endowment for the Humanities and additional support from private individuals and foundations. The project officially finished in 2012 at which point the maintenance of this site fell to the Hermon Dunlap Smith Center for the History of Cartography at the Newberry.

<span style="font-size: 0.85em; color: #666;"><strong>Past Project Staff:</strong> John H. Long: Editor, and Historical Compiler; Peggy Tuck Sinko: Assoc. Editor, and Historical Compiler; Gordon DenBoer: Historical Compiler; Emily R. Kelley: Historical Compiler, and GIS Compiler; Laura Rico-Beck: GIS Specialist, and GIS Compiler; Peter Siczewicz: GIS Consultant, and Interactive Map-site (ArcIMS) Designer; Robert Will: Cartographic Assistant, and Historical Compiler; John Ford: Cartographic Assistant, and Historical Compiler; Kathryn Ford Thorne: Historical Compiler; Deborah Skok: Historical Compiler; George E. Goodridge, Jr.: Historical Compiler; Douglas Knox: Book Digitizing Director, and GIS Compiler; Brodie Austin: Atlas Website Designer.</span>

